hello guys welcome to my lecture in this
lecture today I'm going to talk to you
about basics of genetics for beginners
let me first begin by the definition of
genetics genetics is a branch of biology
that is concerned with the study of
genes genetic variation and heavy duty
in organisms so what is in it is
basically as the name suggests it is the
study of the teens and the genetic
variation and he did 'ti in organisms or
individual okay so this is the
definition of genetics now let me
introduce you to another tom which is
called
trait so what is our trait a treat is a
physical characteristics or attributes
so this trait can be the height of the
person color of the eye color of the
skin or color of the hair etc if you
have a look at this picture here the
picture of a beautiful girl she has a
black here and brown skin these are her
traits and she she's short she's short
this is also her trait okay so what is a
treat a trait is nothing but simple
physical characteristics of its abuse of
an organism or an individual that is a
trait so for this goal here are black
hair brown skin and short height these
are some of the examples of our traits
headed eatery or genetic information is
found in the DNA the definition of the
DNA I'll discuss you later so now I want

you to have a look at this picture here
this picture here shows the schematic
representation of the cell what is a
cell a cell is a smallest structure and
functional unit of the organism so in
the center of the cell we have something
called the nucleus and in the nucleus
chromosome is present okay so chromosome
is present in the nucleus of the cell so
now I'm gonna talk to you about what is
chromosome
and what is DNA so the DNA is the double

helical structure like shown here in the
picture which is very very long
so this DNA is quite super quiet around
some proteins and it's it's and it's
very very very condensed and when it's a
convict quiet and super coil around some
proteins and condensed it comes in the
form of chromosome okay so what is the
chromosome chromosome is a DNA which has
wrapped around some specific proteins
quiet and super quiet and convinced to
become the chromosome okay so why why
did is a need for the DNA to to become
context because DNA is long and double
helical chemical long structure like
this and it cannot fit in this small
nucleus nucleus is very very small when
the DNA is long like this it cannot fit
in this nucleus therefore it has to wrap
around some specific proteins and
condensed become super coiled structure
and condensed okay and then only in the
in the form of chromosome then only it
can fit in the nucleus
get the purpose of the chromosome is is
because the DNA cannot fit and such
therefore it has to quiet and super
quiet around some specific proteins to
form a condensed structure the
chromosome like here so that it can fit
in the nucleus so this is the definition
of chromosome and the DNA okay so now
now you know about the DNA and
chromosome so what is a gene so ich is
shown by the box here a gene is this a
segment a segment of the DNA which code
for specific proteins which in turn
expressed some specific traits that is
called the Zeen not all parts of the DNA
is coding you know some parts of the DNA
is coding and making function making
proteins and expressing with some
specific trace while the remaining part
of the DNA is non-coding so like I said
the Box on the DNA strand above is a
special section where it's a special
section because it calls for some
protein
Whittington Express specific trait okay
that is a DNA that is a zine so genes
code for a specific protein that port
for specific traits we human beings have
two genes for every trips to genes for
every trip or all things comes in pair
why this so because we human beings have
23 pairs of chromosome so one from
father one from the male gamete and the
other for mother or the female gamete so
so basically we have in each pair we
have homologous chromosome so what are
these homologous chromosomes homologous
chromosomes are the chromosomes which
are similar in size and the structure
and they they carry similar Jean similar
genes we scored four similar proteins
which in time Express similar traits
okay so these are homologous genes so
for example in this chromosome here
let's say that this is the gene that is
that goes for the protein which Express
height and this also this also is the
gene gene that code for the protein with
Express height in this chromosome of
this this Dean of this chromosome and
this thing of this chromosome both of
these they actually code for the
specific trait height okay so therefore
this this thing is called an allele and
this one is also canon called an allele
in a pair okay so basically what is an
ally an allele is is one gene in a pair
in a homologous chromosome so one gene
in a pair that is called a lead which we
scored for this specific trait for
example here I have said that this one
and this one both of these they code for
the protein which in turn expresses
specific trait let's say that is height
so therefore this is called an allele so
what is an allele annalee is one gene in
a pair so that is called emply okay so I
I repeat this is a very very important
concept so what is an elite we have a
homologous chromosome like I have shown
here
this this this in and this thing both of
these they code for the proteins which
in turn express similar trade let's say
that they are responsible for the height
so therefore this one is called an
allele or and also this one is called a
little so wanting in a pair that is
called allele so these two chromosomes
are homologous chromosomes okay so what
is an ally and it really is one gene in
a pair ones in in up here so good so now
I want you to think like this okay in
the nucleus we have the chromosomes so
what is chromosome chromosome is DNA
plus some specific proteins super
comments right so and then comes the DNA
okay because DNA and in the DNA this
some segment of the DNA or some specific
segment or the part or the section of
the DNA is the scene and the scene
actually in one gene in appear that is

called an allele so I want you to think
like to think the concept of chromosome
DNA gene and Halil in in the cost in in
the boxes shown here like this this
thing things like that the big box is
chromosome and smaller than that one is
DNA is smaller than that one is gene and
endi the smallest one is an allele okay
this thing like this
so more definition what is a locus I
explained I explained it explain what is
a zine a zine is a specific segment off
a DNA so and now I will explain what is
a locus or Lucas is a location of a zine
on a chromosome let's say that this is a
chromosome okay this is a chromosome
these these two represents homologous
chromosomes so the locus of a location
of this gene for height this is called
locust okay so what is the locust locust
for this red gene this location here on
this chromosome that is the locals and
the location for this green gene which
is the gene for seed shape so what is
the locus the locus is the location
location here on this chromosome that is
the locus sober locus is a specific
location on chromosome for a gene that
express of course some proteins
and express some traits okay so that is
the locust locust is the name suggest a
location of the gene on a chromosome so

I will now discuss some more terminal
losses here let's say about capital T
represents domain and zine for the trade
tall and small T represents recessive
gene for the trade short okay so what is
a heterozygous organism an individual or
organism is said to be heterozygous for
an even trade if one of the alleles is
dominant while the other is recessive
okay so for example capital T represents
dominant allele and small T represents a
recessive allele if an organism has
capital T and small T together so that
kind of organism is called heterozygous
organism okay so look at this picture
here this is your homologous chromosome
pair so if this is the capital T this is
an allele this one is also an allele but
if this one is capital T representing
for the tall and if this one is small T
for the short and this and if the
organism has these babies this early
this this one capital T and small T so
this actually is called heterozygous
organism or individual isn't is for a
given trait for the height they have
tall and short mixed together
okay so because capital T is the
dominant allele so because the capital T
is the dominant allele it will mask the
expression of the protein coded by this
allele okay
so if this one is the capital T if this
this one is their small T so this
capital T will marks the expression of
the protein by small T hence the
organism will be tall so the result of
this the phenotype of this heterozygous
organism will be tall because why it
will be tall is because we have here one
allele as the dominant capital T and
this capital T this dominant allele will
mask the expression or
the recessive allele okay the protein
coded by the recessive allele which in
turn actually expressed peak height okay
table so we will get the tall organism
here white all organism capital T will
must be expression of the small T okay
so now another important concept is
homozygous so one is homozygous organism
if an individual or organisms if in an
individual or organisms for the given
trace if both alleles are dominant
that is called homozygous dominant for
example if in this if in this case in
this example if this one is also this
one is capital T if this only is capital
T dominant gene for the tallness and
this one is also capital T this is
capital T and this one is also capital T
then we will have the organism that will
have both capital T okay in its genetic
makeup so then this kind of organism is
called homozygous dominant because
capital T represents dominant trait
which is tall so we will have the tall
organism as the phenotype
okay so he's a tall organism is the
phenotype phenotype is the physical
obedience okay physical appearance so
we'll have the taller mechanisms so
another homozygous other type of
homozygous organism is called homozygous
recessive so that is if an organism or
individual for the given trace if both
the alleles are recessive and that is
called homozygous recessive for example
if this is a small t and this one is a
small T now in this case this allele we
expressed the trait the short because
small T is the recessive gene and that
course for this for the protein which
will quote for the short plant okay
which will result in short quant
so then we will have the short plant so
if both the alleles are also recessive
then like here small T and small T we
will get the short plant the the result
of this will be that the phenotype of
the plant will be the short in
homozygous resist recessive the
phenotype of the plant will be short why
because both of the alleles are
recessive and this
she believes it's bracing for the fit
shortness okay
so we'll have a short plan here in the
heterozygous intersex organism we call
the tall plan because we had one
dominant allele and one dominant allele
is enough to express the trait is it
straight so we will get the tall plant
because it will mask the inspiration of
the recessive allele here in both the
cases we have both dominant
tall tall dominant allele so we will get
the tall plant and here in this case or
homozygous recessive case we have both
recessive allele so the end result will
be we will get B short plant in the
phenotype of the plant will be short
because both of these are recessive
genes expressing for the short trait
okay so this this is these are some
definitions and now some more
definitions genotype like I said earlier
genetic makeup of an organism is called
genotype it actually tells what types of
genes our genes are found in the
organism for example in hetero sinus
organism we have one dominant allele and
one recessive allele okay so that is the
genetic makeup of heterozygotes organism
in homozygous organism there can be two
types of homozygous or there there will
be two types one is homozygous dominant
in homozygous dominant organism we have
we will have one dominant both the
dominant alleles
okay so we'll have porterman
analytically and in homozygous recessive
organisms we will have both releasing
alleles
genetically okay so basically these
different types of organisms the Jenner
genotype is telling us what are the
different types of gene genes reform in
the organisms the genetic makeup of the
organism so what is the phenotype like I
said earlier phenotype is the physical
appearance of an organism or an
individual in heterozygous organism
capital T and small T because here we
have the dominant allele so it will mask
the expression of recessive allele so we
will have the tall plant okay you will
have tall plants so this is the
phenotype tall plant in case of
homozygous dominant where both alleles
are dominant capital T and small T here
also we will get
tall plant and this tall plant is the
phenotype of this homozygous dominant
organism our dominant plant we can say
even plant because I'm giving you the
example of plant in case of homozygous
recessive in case of homozygous
recessive plant we have both the
recessive alleles small T small T
representing for short so the phenotype
of the plant will be the short will be
short so phenotype is a physical
appearance of an organism or an
individual I hope this video was helpful
I will come up with more videos on
genetics thank you very much